I have the word catharsis in here.
That's the word she used.
Yes, my daughter read the book.
Well, she's had the book for a couple of weeks, and she also was reading it as I would give her pages, every 30, 40 pages.
She's the only one I did it with.
I didn't show anyone, not even my wife, the book.
Just Nancy.
And she said she read up until the last 30 pages, and then she couldn't go near it for about two weeks, and then she finally did.
And
She said although she cried a lot, it became a catharsis for her because she remembers it differently and she didn't realize what went on between me and Joan's mother and finally my two friends who were the only ones that got me through it.
But it was like a whole new experience for her.
She feels that she's been filled in with a lot of information that she didn't know.
And she's the one you didn't tell.
She's the one I didn't tell, right.
She's the daughter that you actually felt very badly at the end.
Terrible.
And what you say very clearly in the book.
Yeah, and she says, because her daughter, her sister was five years older, is five years older, and she said she just wished she had fought that five years more with Joan than as Ellen did.
And I have to tell you, there are some very funny lines in here.
Well...
That's part of my business.
But I wasn't sure I'd be able to do it in prose, but I think I found a way.
And I think my playwriting career helped me write this book because I seem to have a natural ability, I guess, for construction, even though I don't sit down to plan the construction.
But I find whenever I write something, there's usually a beginning, middle, and end, even though I may deviate and go...
go back and forth in time.
How long now did you rewrite this with the same intensity that you do the day?
Well, not quite as much, because when you do a play and you try out the play, you're trying it out night after night after night, and there are different audience reactions, and there are different critics as you, well, not during the previous, but certainly when you're out of town.
So you keep adjusting it and adjusting it.
Here the rewrites came mostly from when I finished the book, put it aside for about a month or so, then went back and started to read it and started to fix things up.
Then came the process of working with the editors who would say, that's a wonderful story, but I think it's irrelevant to what you're saying at this point.
Let's leave that out.
unless you don't want to.
They're very good about that.
It's a different experience for you, isn't it?
I mean, because a playwright, now that I think of it, doesn't really work with an editor.
No, not at all.
The closest you come is with a director who will only suggest, but he knows that you're going to see up on stage what he sees, so you both make the decision at the same time.
But here I was relying a lot on what Michael Corder and Chuck Adams at Simon & Schuster had to say about it.
And sometimes they'd say, you didn't go far enough with this.
This is good.
Let's hear more about it.
And once they wanted to know why I left out something.
I can't recall what it was.
So I wrote them a two-page letter to tell them why I left this thing out of the book.
And Chuck Adams called me back and he says, can I put the letter in the book?
Because it explains exactly what I wanted to know about this specific subject.
So that process was wonderful.
And then you go through the various, as you know,
of various other editors, the one who just cleans up the... The copy editor.
The copy editor, right, the grammar and the spelling, etc.
But then there's the legal one.
And that kind of drove me crazy, because they would say, can you verify that your mother and father have these fights?
And I said, I beg your pardon, I was there.
I mean, they are just so specific about things.
They're so afraid.
Well, they didn't know.
They said, well, perhaps your father is alive and he's going to come and sue us for this.
I have to tell you, my own experience, that's ridiculous.
It is.
With all due respect.
It must have been a young copy editor, somebody who knew it.
Well, I don't know.
They're just a voice, you know, or a fax away.
I'm just so impressed and amazed by it.
this process of writing for performance.
I mean, every work, it seems, is a work, a play is a continual work in progress.
Yes, it's malleable.
You keep changing and changing.
And you don't get that with the book, I guess, once it's done.
Once it's done, I know.
I can't go back.
I mean, would you like to go back and tinker with any parts of it now?
Oh, I guess, sure.
I mean, there's not a thing I've ever written.
I don't know why.
About tinkering, that I do go back with plays that have opened.
And I go back a couple of months later and I said, let's take out that speech and let me add a different speech there.
I think I could, I finally fixed it.
There's a play I did Laughter on the 23rd floor and there was an exit line that truly needed a laugh because it was the Sid Caesar character called Max Prince left on an exit line and it cried out for something funny at that moment.
And I never could get it.
Three months later, it just, my daughter said something to me, uh,
It's about April, June, and November, and I switched the words around, and I was able to put it in.
So it won't happen with rewrites, but I'll get another chance, because there'll be a sequel to this.
I have to write the second half of my life.
You say very early in the book you love great beginnings.
Well, it's true, I do, yeah.
They have everything in life and plays.
A. Bowes, the author, said anyone can write a first act to a play.
It's the second act.
It's what separates the boys from the men.
Or the girl from the lake.
But it seems to me that you've already set up the beginning for the sequel.
Well, I set it in the introduction, because I wrote the introduction after I finished the book, and I intended to write the full book, but when I cut to around page 400, which has been reduced a little bit, I said, if I keep on writing the next 20-some-odd years,
It's another 400.
I don't want an 800-page book as an autobiography.
It just seems presumptuous on my part.
And I felt spent.
After I wrote those last 25, 30 pages about Joan, I said, I just don't want to deal with it anymore.
So he put aside, and Michael Carter said, absolutely.
He says, we'll do the sequel next time.
Do you know what the first printing was, just out of curiosity?
I think 60,000.
Now they're up to 80,000.
People think that you, because you've written so many really genuinely funny things, that you probably always expect it to be funny.
Well, they may have in the beginning.
I think with the plays that I've done in the last 15 years, which have been much more serious plays, at least the subjects are dramatic, even though there is comedy within it.
they stopped expecting that from me.
But with critics, it's interesting.
It's such a love-hate relationship.
I love it when you learn something from them.
When they are there, there are some, what I call the gunfighters, the gunslingers, the ones who are just out there, bang, there's the next play, I'm going to shoot it down.
I mean, in the New York Times, there was this guy.
It really irritated me
not so much about what he didn't like about it, because I've gotten some really wonderful reviews with this, but he started comparing the end of the book, of my telling of the death of Joan, as being, of course it's going to move anybody, but it wasn't as good as the one I did in the play of Jake's Women.
And that irritated me so much, because he was now treating something that is so important to me and to my family as a
Something about commerce, you know, gee, I could do the ending of Joan's death better.
I could make it more touching, more emotional.
It's mind-boggling that somebody would be so idiotic to write something like that.
But this is a man from Variety they got to write the review.
I said, give me William Sapphire, give me John Upback.
You know, if you want to knock the pros, I'll take it from them, but Variety not.
The only bad review I got in my book,
was in the L.A.
Times by some putz.
It's a copy editor for Variety.
He clearly didn't even read the book.
I don't want to get into it.
I know how you feel.
It's from Variety.
These people don't realize how much of your heart and your soul goes into this thing.
And with a 20-minute review, how hurtful it can be.
I guess the people who don't write books, because I was interviewed by a woman this morning who works for Theatre Week, and I told her how irritated I was.
I mean, I'm used to getting bad reviews in the New York Times, and you can't complain about a bad review on your play.
It's not done.
But I wasn't complaining about this review, which was, if you don't get to the last paragraph, it was a very good review.
This thing of singling out how I portrayed my wife's death in one thing as opposed to another.
You see what kind of a mind that is.
And also that it comes from variety, which is not known for their prose, I wouldn't say.
I think that in drama, the review is so much more important.
I mean, it can really spell the difference between life and death.
Well, because you've only got about eight or nine that make any difference.
And...
although I've overcome a lot of New York Times bad reviews, if the play is solid and the word of mouth is good during the previews, you can overcome it and they'll just say, oh, well, that critic, he always does that to me or to somebody else because Frank Rich, who was the critic for so many years, there was called The Butcher of Broadway with good reason, I think.
But he could give you a good review and if the audiences don't like the play, they're just not going to come.
So it's up to them
Initially, or eventually, rather.
That's what you have to live with.
I just read in the Times a couple days ago that there was this monster musical, I guess, on Broadway.
Big?
Yeah.
Close to a $10 million loss.
$10 million loss.
It's unbelievable.
In the grand scheme of things, that's not a lot of money, is it?
Yeah, it's a lot of money.
$10 million for painting.
Oh, well, someone pays $80 million for a building, but $10 million for a musical, the stakes are big.
I don't know where they get their money, and yet it's very hard to get money to do a straight play, because the returns aren't as big, because you can't run eight or nine or ten years like, you know, it's Phantom of the Opera.
If a play is a hit today, and it runs a year and a half, you've had a big hit.
I wonder, I wonder, I know how hard it is to publish a book for the first time.
Right.
I have to think that getting a play produced has got to be the most intimidating thing in the world.
Yeah.
What do you tell a youngster that comes up to you and says, I want to be a part?
Well, there aren't a lot who come up anymore because they're all aiming to write screenplays, and then they want to drop the screenplays and become a director.
And because even writing films, since I came into it, has changed so much, is that almost there's hardly a writer who can make a contract and say, I can't be rewritten.
If you want rewrites, I'll do it.
They'll say, no, we want to bring in other writers and fix this stuff, because their investment is $70 million, $60 million, something like that.
So I'm
amazed when I hear that there's someone who wants to be a playwright.
I called Stanford University once because I wanted to teach for one year.
And I said, I was looking around what universities I would go to, and I liked the idea of Stanford because I liked where it was.
It was close enough to home, not to be away so long.
And they were overwhelmed, and they said, my God, yes, we would love it.
I said, just tell me how many students you think you can get.
So she called me back in about three days, and she said, we can get five.
Yeah.
And I said, if I was going to teach screenplay writing, how many would I get?
She said, well over 200.
So that's where the world is going.
And if you read the New York Times Magazine section, the world of the future, we're all going to be wiped out by something.
Is that today's terms?
Yeah.
I've been traveling.
I haven't seen it.
My wife has any problem.
The entire issue is dedicated to the future.
Every writer that they have on their staff, or maybe some outside writers, too, talk about the future.
like a hundred years from now.
Well, do you think then that it's an anachronism?
I mean, do you think writing... No, I don't.
I mean, we got this far, you know, since the beginning of drawing on the walls of a cave that I think the great writers will still persist.
I think people will still always want live theater.
The venues will change.
Off-Broadway has a great many plays,
But the plays that are running now, and again, it's only because of dollars, which is what the movie business is about.
The day that I first saw in the New York Times, which has to be well over 10 years ago, I guess, where the New York Times started printing the grosses each weekend of the movies, and I said, it's all over because now it's all about money.
It's not about how good it is.
When you hear people in California talk about a picture,
They rarely talk about the quality of the picture.
They may say it's great or it's bad, but they never talk about what the content is about.
They'll say, did 60 million, and I think it should go through the roof to 100 million.
That's what they talk about.
Now, you said home.
Home now for you is there?
Well, yeah, I live there mostly now because I'm married to Diane, and we have a 12-year-old daughter, and she's in school there.
My two daughters live in Santa Barbara.
One of them is writing screenplays.
Nancy's writing screenplays.
short stories.
So it's easier for me to be there, but this is the department we've been in here for about eight or nine years.
And when I do a play, then I come here and I spend a lot of time.
But I mean, you talk about New York is still... It's home, yeah.
It's New York.
Absolutely.
I'm rooting for the Yankees down in the woods.
I mean, New York, if you'd been out to see New York, it's book country on Fifth Avenue.
I know.
Oh, there's some people out there.
Well, that's what's great.
L.A.?
No.
Forget it.
There were some good bookstores in L.A., but you can't find them anymore.
Well, the big ones, Brentano's.
I did a signing out there in February.
I sent 450 bookstores.
Oh, you mean in a number of places?
No, one place.
In one place?
It was the Antiquarian Book Fair.
I signed for a whole weekend.
And, no, but it was book collectors, you know, they were coming and they were buying my books and they were sitting ducks for me, you know, but, but.
But it's this one book you're talking about.
This book, yeah, it's fancy.
You know, but really, you'd never see anything like this, any place that I could think of.
I mean, even Boston, as literate a community as Boston is, just thousands and thousands of people out there.
walking up and down just out of interest in the book.
That's true.
Yes, it's really wonderful.
It took me eight years to write my book.
And, you know, you write it, and you say, Jesus, what a hell he likes it.
And finally, you know, it gets out, and you wait for the reviews.
I have to think that as a playwright, though,
You get that.
It's like a musician.
You know instantly if the audience likes it or if they don't like it, don't you?
Not with the book, with the play.
I'm saying by contrast to the book.
Right.
I know that on the first night that we show it in front of an audience, what that reaction is.
I mean, it may not be totally accurate, but you can tell by the end of that first week that this audience loves this play.
It doesn't mean that the critics will, but it makes me feel good about the play.
But a book, I mean, once it got around to some of my friends, it would trickle in because it takes them a few days to read it if they even had devoted to it.
You get a phone call here, you get another phone call there.
So it's a different process.
I guess I'm actually asking about writing a play for performance.
And, you know, it's one reason I still write for newspapers.
I'll write something tomorrow, and I'll see it in print in a couple days, and I'll know if it's a bust.
I mean, if I messed it up, I'll hear.
If people like it, I'll hear.
You know, that is one of the nice things about waiting for the papers, is you do get that immediate feedback.
But, I mean, I get it eventually, because it takes a long time.
I'm doing a new play the next summer that I've been on for five years.
It doesn't mean I've been on all the time, but it's been
a lot of rewrites, and then I wrote it as a film, and then a number of studios wanted to buy it, and I said, oh, they're anxious for it, and I think I'll go back and do it as a play, and now I have more faith in it.
So I have to wait a long time until I'm going to get that first reaction.
You know, because you've been so private about yourself over the years, which I respect, I guess I never, and I've seen all of the movies and the number of the plays, and I guess I never realized how much of yourself
Yeah, I did, even though I changed the facts around a lot.
For example, something like Brighton Beach Memoirs, which in the play, it's my family taking in my mother's sister and their two daughters.
In real life, it was the opposite.
My parents broke up, and my mother and I went to live with a cousin, and my brother went to live with an aunt.
I'm not interested in making these plays autobiographical, and they know what my life is about.
The creative process is such that you are taking elements from your own life.
Yeah, I have to, yes.
But I've done it in about nine of the 29 plays I've done, but that's a lot.
I think so, yeah.
I mean, some that I consider autobiographical aren't even about me, like the odd couple is about my brother and a good friend of ours.
But, I don't know, I seem to know it so well.
Sometimes I can make a mistake in geography and not get the play right.
For example, I wrote a play that was not very successful, and I didn't like it very much.
It was called Star Spangled Girl.
But it came from, well, if you read the book, you know it came from that Patty Chiafstein meeting with this woman.
Had I written with a conversation on that level, plus written the play, Star Spangled Girl, and said it in New York, it would have been a better play.
because I would know where the people went to and where they came back.
I was writing about San Francisco where I had never been.
It's like writing in a vacuum.
And it's absolutely wrong for me.
And I did a play in London Suite.
The first play took place in England.
They all took place in England.
But it was about two Englishmen, a writer and his business manager, who robbed him of all of his money.
And he brings him up to this hotel to kill him.
And ultimately he doesn't.
It just humiliates him.
But
It was tough going here because I was keeping so close to the English idiom, which I can write sometimes well.
But had I made that in American play, it would have been much better.
It was one of four one-act plays.
Do you have a sense of who you're writing for, who the audience is?
Well, it depends what medium you're writing for.
I have no sense if I write for television.
None.
22 million people out there.
You can't see them, you know.
I was able to be in the garage someplace, you know, drinking beer, and I had no idea what they want to see.
And it's generally not what I want to write.
With a movie, it comes down.
The numbers come down.
But again, that's spread out over the country.
When I think about my plays, I don't think where they'll ultimately be.
I'll think of New York with a thousand people in the audience that night and a tough audience, too.
And if it goes well there, then I feel like I've done well with it.
So that's who I picture.
And I can picture some of the critics, but that's pointless, because you can never have cast the critics.
Do you make yourself laugh?
Well, when I'm writing it, at the moment that it happens, some things will make me laugh.
Others, I just... I like it.
I mean, there was a time...
when I would write a line like The Art Couple, and I said, God, this is going to be a humongous laugh, which it was.
I stumbled on it.
But people who lived with me, like Joan and Marsha Mason and now Diane, said they walked by my door and they hear me mumbling.
So I'm talking aloud as I'm writing, mostly, oh, not on this book,
Only when I'm doing it for plays, because I want to hear what it sounds like in the mouths of the actors, if you can hear it.
So you do that with all the plays?
Yeah.
I don't realize it.
I try to keep it low, but they hear me mumbling away.
But it doesn't happen when I'm doing this, because I'm not reading it aloud for somebody.
Do you visualize it in performance, too?
Oh, yeah.
Do you see it?
And why it's easier for me to write for the theater, which isn't for most people.
Most writers I know would rather write if it's not a book.
they would rather write for the screen.
But what I picture in the audience, I don't care what seat you're sitting in, way over the side, this side, upstairs, there's still that proscenium.
So that's the view you're gonna get, whereas the film, they come in, they shoot from this side, from above, underneath, not even that character, they're on this character.
And in that editing process, they break up the music.
I write, I always hear a certain kind of music, not literal music, but the music of the words.
and there's a certain flow to them, and I've had actors like Jack Lemmon say, he said, it's odd, it doesn't happen with hardly any writer that he works with, but if you leave out an and, an if, or a but, he says, it doesn't make much difference to the speech, but when you hear it, something is missing.
So, uh... And Lemmon is quite a cerebral... Oh, yeah.
...can really articulate the craft.
He can, yeah, he's wonderful.
Well, Mercedes' rule, when we're doing Lost in Young,
came to me.
What's your schedule?
Pardon me?
Yeah, I have a full 6.15.
Okay.
Mercedes came to me when we were in previews with Lost in Young, and she said, and we had done the play for six or eight weeks on the road, really, four weeks in University of North Carolina and then in Washington, and she said, I beg of you, Neil, if you would just take this one line out of the speech, because I think it hurts what she's trying to say, and it
She gave me about five different reasons, and I said, Mercedes, try it tonight, and, you know, if you're more comfortable with it, then fine, we'll leave it out.
So she did the speech that night, and she didn't take the line out.
And I came to her, and I said, why don't you take it out?
And she said, I missed it.
She says, I felt the music was wrong.
That's wonderful.
That must make you feel... Well, you feel wonderful about that, yes.
You say in the book that you've really only written two plays with a specific actor.
No, I don't think any plays.
Walter Matthau was in my mind, but I didn't know I would get it when I was writing the article.
It's two films.
I'm sorry, two films.
Two films.
That you've actually written with the actors in mind that I knew I would get.
That's right.
Because it's pointless to write for an actor.
Because someone said to me, when you're doing a film, you're only going to do it for these two actors.
But when you're writing a play, you're hoping 50 years from now they'll be
all kinds of people doing this play.
So you tend to think much more of the character as a real character when you're doing it as a play than I do when I'm writing a film, which sometimes can hurt it, because I'm thinking of a personality.
Because I know, especially in this day and age, that if I go to a studio with a film that I'm writing, they're going to say, well, we're limited to the kinds of actors we can get for this part.
We can't get
a box office actor for this, so they're not as interested in that film as much, which may change your mind about the kind of movie you want to do.
That was not the case 25 years ago when a movie cost about $2 million to do or $3 million.
You can't even get a supporting agent for that category.
That's right, yeah.
But when you're writing a play,
Do you still kind of visualize?
Do you have a sense of what the character is?
Is there a generic character in mind?
Yeah, there is.
There is.
And when they come for auditions, you say, that's it.
First, when you see them coming in to read, and you say, oh, God, please let this person read well because it's exactly what I'm looking for in the type.
And it's about 50-50.
It doesn't really work out that much.
The performance takes over of what they do.
There's some wonderful moments in there.
You even tell that story about Dustin Hoffman when he does the graduate thing.
Well, he told me that story.
I would never tell it.
I heard it from someone else.
But she knew immediately, didn't she, was there?
And he knew, I guess.
Well, it's what I wrote later on in the book when I had the opening night of my first play, Come Blow Your Horn, when Joan, who was the most supportive person in the community, and she...
had a fight with me that night, and I realized that she was afraid something was going to change us if it was successful.
And the fact that it was, was wonderful.
And then there was the other side of the coin, how she protected me later on when I did the gingerbread lady, and the man came to the phone from Life magazine, wanted to listen to the review coming in, and she shoved him across the room.
She was small.
I mean, I just cheered for her.
It was great.
My editor, incidentally, Holt is my publisher, lives in Pound Ridge.
Do you still have the property up there?
No, I sold all those.
After she died, I sold it.
That was nice to have that place as you did.
Well, I mean, I was lucky enough to be able to afford it, and I felt so helpless in not being able to do anything for her.
And also because I was just trying to keep things from her.
But still going up and buying that house, I knew she would love to be there, because she thought she would be all right.
The doctors told her she would.
He said, listen, you never can tell.
One doctor said that to me, but the one who did the operation, who was going to do the biopsy on the leg, found it here, and he says, no, no way.
That's 25 years ago, because times have... Oh, yeah.
I don't even think about chemotherapy then.
Whether they would have given it to her or not, I don't know.
I'm sure things would have been treated differently.
Do you have favorites in your works?
Well, I mean, I never understood what favorite may mean.
Do I like the play better, and for what reason do I like that play better?
So it always has to do with that I have a good time doing that play.
Was the writing experience good?
Were the actors that I worked with fun?
I mean, I've done plays where I hated every minute of being there.
I had trouble with the director, and then the play came out all right.
But I think Lost in Yonkers, I think, is the best play that I've written.
But, you know, they're like your children.
You don't favor any.
There are some I disfavor.
I mean, I don't like them.
I felt, God, I really did a lousy job with this.
Not that I could have done a good job, because I think it's written on the wall already about the play.
I feel when I sit down to write a play, I usually say this to myself, if you write this to the best of your ability, how good could it be?
And sometimes the answer is, it could be pretty good, and sometimes it could be incredible.
And so you have to resist the temptation to write the one that's going to be just pretty good, because it's going to be an easier play to write.
I wrote a couple where I knew there wouldn't be hits at all, but I felt the need to write them, which I think I talked about in the book.
One was God's favorite because it was something that would be cathartic for me to get out my anger towards why John died.
And the other was The Good Doctor because I wrote that while John was sick and I had to keep myself busy back then.
That's the professional, and actually the
Well, there's something that happens, and I've never been able to figure it out, too.
Joan was in the bedroom, and I was in this room here.
And the minute I go into that world, I'm in there.
And it has to be broken by something.
I don't just think about what's waiting on the other side.
I knew that, A, if I didn't just keep writing every day, she was going to suspect something.
What's the matter?
Why are you not doing it?
Why aren't you working on it?
And she was making somewhat of a recovery then because the radiation reduced the tumor.
So I thought, gee, maybe we can do all right, and I kept writing.
Do you enter a kind of zone when the writer entered that world?
You mean a figurative one?
Yeah.
I mean, you just mentioned, you just said that, you know, you divorce yourself and what's going on.
Why could there be any place?
I've written in the dentist's office waiting to go in.
Because if I'm driving to get to the dentist's office, my mind is working on the thing that I had been writing that morning.
So I said, oh God, I want to hold on to those couple lines.
So I brought the pad with me or whatever.
Sometimes I just write down a magazine and take it with me.
But I am in a zone.
And I've heard for so long how lonely it is for writers.
I've never felt that.
I've never felt like, God, I'm alone in this room.
I wish there was somebody here with me.
I wish there was someone who was going to call me.
It's just a place I like to be.
Have you ever thought, you know, do you see the plays as a corpus?
I mean, if we really want to know about your life and about you, and you've mentioned 50 years from now, 100 years from now, do you think that anybody who reads your plays
will get a sense of that?
Well, some.
I mean, Patty Chiesky said to me that Prisoner of Second Avenue will give a very clear picture of what New York City and maybe America was like at that particular time, because it's right at the period when the drugs started to proliferate and crime started to hit the big cities, and that's what that play was about.
They were robbed right in their house.
Everything about it was grim, and yet somehow I managed to find some humor in it, too.
the art couple too, I guess, but the art couple is very universal.
I mean, that'll go on for years and years because it's such a universal subject.
And that's a title, actually, like The Right Stuff Can Catch 22, that I think has entered our language.
Oh, it has.
But it was in our language first.
And I just used it
And if something's taken on a new meaning... Yeah, it's really taken on a context.
It has a context that you think of the art couple, you think of the play.
Well, I purposely do that sometimes.
I take things from the language that sometimes sound like something we heard, like Last of the Red Hot Lovers.
That was a play on what Sophie Tuckie used to be called, Last of the Red Hot Mamas.
Since this man was anything but the last of the Red Hot Lovers, he was not a lover at all.
It seemed so an ironic title.
Prisoner of Second Avenue was a good title because it gave a perfect image of what this man was going through because he lost his job at the age of 48 and his wife went out and went back for the job that she used to have that she quit to raise her daughters for.
And he knew how many steps around the corners of the room there were.
So titles are very important.
Sometimes when I don't get a good title, it means I don't know what the name of it, what the play is really about.
I had this title way before I ever wrote the book, because I feel my life is about rewrites, not only in terms of the rewrites I actually do, but the way I've had to rewrite my life based on the circumstances that have happened over.
It's a wonderful quality.
It's distracting me from where I was going with the next thing.
It's the next question.
I'm sorry.
Has that ever happened to you?
You're on a track and it was... I also like the fact, you know, this could almost be a... I've got a primer for prospective players.
That's what Joseph Yachty said.
He said this should be required... Because, you know, it's... People are saying, hey, character...
the dialogue, giving you the sequence of things that come.
Yeah, from the beginning to the end, as I was learning it.
I didn't want to keep it strictly that.
I didn't want to just be that.
No, of course not, but it's not dropping names.
You're not dropping names.
No, they were all part of my learning process.
And I love Jerry Lewis, you know, astounded by the fact that, well, let's cut this, cut this.
He was.
I'll never forget that.
He said, you're the first writer I ever met who didn't mind
cutting something.
And I said, well, why would I want to leave it in when we both know it's not working?
I'm glad to get that.
Well, plus you had to get eight minutes out of that.
Yeah, well, that's the pragmatic thing.
But to find which eight minutes was easy for me, because I had heard it in the rehearsal.
I said, this doesn't work, and this doesn't work.
So as I said at the end of that chapter, I was sure learning about how to rewrite, even though I didn't know how to write yet.
What's funny for me is that you laugh at him despite yourself.
Jerry Lewis.
Right, because I knew it was the lowest common denominator of humor, but it also appealed to that part of Cambridge's life.
And listen, the whole country was a Jerry Lewis fan at that time.
Well, I mean, I'm 53.
I grew up watching Martin and Lewis and all the other stuff.
Yeah, they were pretty funny.
They were funny.
And then, of course, the French, as you point out, are crazy about it.
You know, all these different plays that you've been talking about, there is a poignancy with all of them.
And we're talking about
levels of humor.
Do you have a philosophy on humor?
I mean, is it possible for you to go out and write a very serious drama without any... I doubt it.
I mean, I've thought about that, and people have asked me about that, and I said somehow the humor would come in because I see humor in certain kinds of situations.
I did something at the end of this book which I thought was kind of daring and worried me, but it's what was going on.
I
When I was going to look for the coffin for Joan, I didn't want to be met by somebody who was going to treat me the way I was treated looking for a coffin for my father and for my mother.
It was the third time I had to do it alone.
And so I switched it.
Instead of saying what I did that time for Joan, I switched it to get my anger out about what happened with the man who was showing it to me for my father.
But there was some humor in it.
It's black humor.
But there was a need to put it in.
And sometimes I'm not always aware where the humor is.
In other words, I'm not always writing.
They're not jokes, because if we take them out of context, they're not very funny.
But when Mike Nichols and I were doing Plaza Suite, we were in Boston trying it out at the Colonial.
And we felt that the first piece had some humor in it.
And then it turns dark when the wife finds out that her husband is probably having an affair with the secretary, and in fact he is.
But the things that she said back to him had humor to them, but they weren't jokes.
But we didn't want the audience to laugh, and they kept laughing.
And Mike and I went in, and we started taking out every laugh, and they found other places to laugh, because I think it made them very uncomfortable.
It was a period in this country...
when the company manager of the play, who was the man who was in charge of really helping us sell the tickets and giving theater parties and all, who said, you can't put this play on.
And I said, why not?
He said, well, you know how many men in the audience are sitting there?
They've come from out of town.
They've brought a girl.
They hired for the night.
I said, tough.
I said, I'm not going to worry about what their moral problems are.
But you say that you
You don't, people do ask you about writing a serious, old serious play.
I did.
I mean, God knows.
Lost in Yonkers is a serious play.
There's humor in it that's the strangest kind of humor.
And I thought it was the best character humor that I had, or character writing I had done.
And it was the character of Bella, who was emotionally retarded by the way her mother spilled in her growth.
And so she wants to tell the family
now that she has met somebody that she wants to marry and open a restaurant with.
And he too, this man has much more, I would say, physical problems in terms of his retardation.
And it's so difficult for her to tell them that she's planned it all.
And someone sits down and she goes, no, no, no, you don't sit there.
You sit over here.
And Jack, you have to sit over here.
Audience laughed their way through it.
And it was funny.
I knew it was funny.
I also knew that the sister, I don't know if you saw it, did you ever see it?
No.
All four children are dysfunctional one way or the other.
One of them had a voice problem, which she couldn't breathe properly, mostly because she was nervous around her mother all the time.
So she had to say the words either on the intake or the outtake.
It was on the out breath, I guess.
I didn't know that.
She would talk like that.
Audiences would laugh.
and I knew they would laugh, and I knew that it was disrespectful to laugh at it, and I think they felt guilty about it, and I think that's what the duty of a playwright is, is sometimes to make the audience uncomfortable about something.
But that's not necessarily what makes a hit, because they don't want to feel uncomfortable.
They don't want you to do that in a play, and yet that became the most successful play for me, in terms of praise, I guess.
Because you don't spend a lot of time on the TV years.
That was the training for you.
Yeah.
Well, first of all, I did do it in a play, Laughter on the 23rd Floor.
And as I try to do in the structure of this book is, when I'm up to a play, then I'll go and talk about what it led up to, or what led up to it.
So when I'm writing about Bath in the Park, I have to proceed it with, Joan and I lived in this apartment, which was five flights up, and so-and-so then comes the play.
But then the art couple, I talk about Danny, me, Roy Gerber, and I get divorced, and so on.
So then comes my writing about the play.
So when I come to writing about laughter on the 23rd floor in the next book, which would be way near the end of the book, I'd go back and talk about the television days.
Because that's what, it was strange to me when I wrote the play, and I said, God, this was 40 years ago, and I was working with these guys.
But this is the time to do the play.
I know you get to,
If you're through, fine.
This is great stuff.
I have no one else coming.
My wife and I are just getting ready to go to dinner in the past 15 minutes.
I'm getting dressed.
Okay.
You know there was a point, you mentioned in the book, a regional theater has kind of, I am interested in the advice that you'd give to a,
a young playwright, and you say, but they're identity, they all want to be screeners.
Yeah, no, but that's, I don't mean that.
But the kid comes up and says, gee, Mr. Senator, are you really serious?
If they're really serious about writing plays and knowing that they're not going to make much money in it, and unless they became successful, then the only advice is you just have to do it out of your own passion and need to do it.
There's no general
advice you give in terms of the writing itself.
Try to write a play about such and such.
Make sure you don't do this when you're writing.
There's nothing, I mean, you have to go your own way.
I broke a lot of rules and laws when I first started doing it.
I asked this question to Edward Albee once, and he said, I asked him, first of all, he advises against trying to be a playwright, and then he says, well, if you can't live without it.
Well, that's what I meant, by the passion.
That's right, and then he said, in that case, I'll
give you the best advice than I can, but the passion has to be there.
Exactly, yeah.
You have to feel that I can't live without trying this, without doing this.
Well, I try to sometimes discourage someone, and I said, if I can discourage you and you'll quit, then you aren't meant to be a playwright.
Then you say, no, I'm going to do it anyway.
So I know what the odds are, and this is not a country anymore, a civilization, as it is in Europe as much, where the theater is the
primary source of entertainment.
You have to realize it's all about movies and television now, and you still want to do it, and you must do it.
Now, you're a writer.
When you write, it's different for me.
Do you think of people reading what you write at any point?
Reading the plays?
Yeah.
Like we read Shakespeare.
They probably read them now more than see them, because it's easier for them to get it.
They could either get the Samuel French editions, or it's published by
It was Randon House, Hussain and Schuster will do it.
So they do read them, but they have readings of them themselves.
There's a man, Senator Alan Simpson, from Wyoming, who's just retired.
I knew him, I know him, and his wife has a group in Wyoming, and they get all the plays from Samuel, French, or wherever, and they have a group of men and women, they sit around the living room and they read the plays, each take a part.
But as a whiter,
It never seemed that you were motivated to write, to be a writer for hard covers, shall we say.
No, no, no.
That's how I spent my youth, reading books.
I mean, I read tons of books, but... I'm just wondering how it happened that you never even... I was just bitten by the theater.
The theater was so glamorous then, back in the 50s when I was going, and even in the 40s, there'd be
30 plays on Broadway, and every year they'd be just all new plays.
And you went to see the good ones and the bad ones, and I was slowly learning about it, even though I didn't know that that's what I was going to do.
Blown away when the first time I saw Streetcar Named Desire with Brandon.
And I said, wow, they broke through all the rules.
There's a guy who's mumbling up on the stage.
And I said, those are people I know on the street, but I never, you have to have good diction to be in the theater.
at that in the first day.
I love to read Tennessee Williams.
I think that... Oh, well, he's a poet, so... I mean, he would take such care of these stage directions.
Yeah, that's true.
And you would never see that in performance.
I'm thinking of Sweetwater View, for instance, this is a brilliant opening.
He is my favorite.
I have everything he did in that first thing.
I'm going to ask you to inscribe this for me.
Would you do that for me?
I have a pen right here.
I hope there's ink left in it.
Oh, I can go get mine.
I guess I kind of used a ton of it right there.
I'll shut this up.
It's really good.
Now, I went up with the signing of the book.